You've been running simulations on a war
with Iran.
>> Yep. Every strategy for 20 years and
it's playing out right now. So I can
tell you that we are losing control of
the situation. Like we don't know where
that nuclear material is, but they have
the material for 16 nuclear bombs and
we've given them every incentive to
develop them.
>> Professor Robert Pap might be the single
most important credible person we all
need to listen to right now. The Supreme
Leader that we took out was against
nuclear weapons. The new Supreme Leader,
and he's way more aggressive.
>> He's advised two decades of presidents
in the White House. President Trump is
really stuck, but he thrives in chaos
and spent 30 years building the
curriculum that trains the Air Force for
the exact type of war that's taking
place now in Iran. And one of the most
mind-blowing things I've learned is that
there are three stages to this conflict.
Unfortunately, Professor Robert Pape,
who has two decades of being correct
with his predictions, gives a 75%
chance that Trump is about to escalate
to stage three. In this episode, we're
going to explain exactly what this
means.
Guys, I've got a quick favor to ask you.
We're approaching a significant
subscriber milestone on this show, and
roughly 69% of you that listen and love
the show haven't yet subscribed for
whatever reason. If there was ever a
time for you to do us a favor, if we've
ever done anything for you, given you
value in any way, it is simply hitting
that subscribe button. And it means so
much to myself, but also to my team
because when we hit these milestones, we
go away as a team and celebrate. And
it's the thing, the simple, free, easy
thing you can do to help make this show
a little bit better every single week.
So, that's a favor I would ask you. And
um if you do hit the subscribe button, I
won't let you down and we'll continue to
find small ways to make this whole
production better. Thank you so much for
being part of this journey. Means the
world. And uh yeah, let's do this.
Professor Robert P.
What the hell is going on in the world?
Now, I should ask I should ask first,
who are you and what have you spent the
last several decades of your life
studying and doing and how does that
relate to what's happening in the world
right now?
>> We are going through a crisis uh more
very intense right now, but it's a
crisis that we have been through before.
um 20 years ago with the Iraq war. Uh
even before that um we saw the bombing
of Gaddafi, we saw the reactions there.
Now I have been studying military
strategy, air power, international
terrorism, now terrorism inside the
United States and also political
violence in the United States. It's not
related to particular groups. So I've
been studying political violence for 40
years. What is the headline that people
need to be aware of when you've looked
at 30 years of these types of wars?
>> That bombs don't just hit targets, they
change politics.
>> What does that mean?
>> That means that before the bombs fall
and even as the bombs are falling now,
we tend to focus on the tactical success
of bombing. We tend to ask, did the
bombs hit the targets? And it's with the
smart bomb age, it's almost mesmerizing.
They hit the target and destroy the
target crater build crater dirt crater
concrete destroy buildings 90% of the
time. The problem is wars are not just
about the hardware. They're not just
about the military operation of putting
a bomb on a target. They're about
politics. And when the bombs start to
fall, the politics in both the target,
the enemy change and the politics in the
attacker, the initiator change. And that
threshold is the beginning of what I'm
calling the escalation trap because you
get at stage one tactical success. Often
what's missing here is the next
consideration which is politics. who
have you advised and at what level have
you advised them on strategy, war, etc.,
etc.
>> So, uh, in the when I finished my PhD,
uh, right away we started to fight the
first Gulf War, which was an allair
power war and I found my work from the
1980s suddenly more relevant than ever.
I was in the Washington Post, USA Today,
frontline uh, designing the stories
because, uh, we didn't have the talking
military heads at the time. And then I
get a call from the US Air Force and
they're asking me to come in and help
not just teach but to build the
curriculum. Then what happens as time
goes on, I end up I end up advising
every White House from 2001 to 2024 uh
including the first Trump White House.
>> I also heard that you've been running
simulations on a war with Iran.
>> Yep. The last class of every strategy
for 20 years. In fact, we did it just
last uh uh last um uh May uh just before
we started the bombing and 90 minutes.
So we the the class goes a whole quarter
uh strategy in all kinds of different
ways and we ended with the bombing of
Iran and what did that mean? That meant
we uh look took out the whole target. We
have the target set laid out. We have
the attack plans. We really go through
the bombing of Natans, Ford, uh Esfon
there. there's a number of these
facilities and so forth. Um, and then we
play out and then we look at what's
going to happen and what you see right
away is 90 plus% those B2s are going to
destroy those targets.
>> B2s being the aircraft
>> these stealthy aircraft that can
penetrate the airspace very few risk of
small risk of loss and then you see but
we don't know where the nuclear material
is. The whole point of this is not to
destroy a building. It's to get at the
5% 20% 60% enriched uranium. That's the
material for bombs. And last May, it was
very clear they had the material for 16
bombs. Now, not to
>> 16 nuclear bombs.
>> One six
>> nuclear bombs.
>> Yes, nuclear bombs. Not to produce them
all in a single week, but over a period
of months. And then at after we did that
simulation, we didn't know where a
single ounce was. And we weren't going
to know for months after. So at the end
of every I make some predictions. I say
what's going to happen? What's going to
happen is after about a year, we are
going to panic because that material
could be dispersed anywhere in Iran,
anywhere in that country. And that
country, look how big that is compared
to the United States.
could be dispersed anywhere now. And how
many of those are are actually
developing toward a bomb? We will not
know. So what will we do? Regime change.
>> From all of your years in I mean 31
years old you start teaching about air
power and and war in this regard. And
you are 65 now.
>> Yeah. What is the from everything you
know 30 30 plus years studying this
stuff Iran running simulations on Iran
advising the White House being a master
and probably arguably the most informed
person in the United States right now
about air attacks like the one the US
performing on Iran? What is the headline
that you're trying to send to the world
at this moment in time? Like what is it
we're missing? Because we're seeing
Trump come out and Trump say it's going
well. Everything's amazing. We've taken
out all their guys. What is what what
are we missing? We're missing that.
We're stuck in a trap of our own making.
I'll explain what that trap is. But the
key consequence of the trap is we're
losing control. We are losing control of
the situation. And what you were seeing
with President Trump is he's trying to
regain control. Now the problem is that
starting not just a week ago Saturday
but starting back in June when we took
out Natan's fore we started to lose
control and what are we losing control
of knowing where that nuclear material
is and we now have civilian satellites
and you can see them moving things. What
would they be moving around the nuclear
areas? I wonder you think they're moving
the the the the you know what are they
moving here? It's most likely going to
be that nuclear material cuz they're
planned
for this war just as we have except
they've been preparing for how to be
resilient, how to now lash back in
increasingly aggressive ways. They are
winning the escalation part of the war
and that's not an accident. this you can
see coming in stages.
>> But for anyone that doesn't know, we've
got leaders that have different levels
of sort of uh information and knowledge
here. I'm going to try and summarize
this and butcher it in the most uh
indelicate way I possibly can. So
earlier last year, last year the United
States suspected that Iran were very
close to enriching uranium. They're at
60%.
>> They're at 60 already.
>> If they get to 90%, they have a bomb. Uh
yes, but possibly even with the 60%
Stephen. It depends on just how good
their scientists are and we're not
really sure. So there's somewhere we're
at 60%, we're already very worried. You
go to 90, it's a gimme.
>> And then the United States dropped these
big bunker buster bombs. They flew those
B2 um airplanes in, dropped these bombs,
>> smashing up the site.
>> Yeah.
>> And then it felt like it was over. And
then we the United States went into
negotiations with Iran to try and get
some kind of deal done
>> to get the material we didn't get. You
see, why are we even talking to them? If
this is really obliterated the program,
why are we bothering to talk to them?
What exactly are we talking about here?
Do you notice the inconsistency here? So
when you say we thought it was over,
that's the public. Okay. Now the public
need to understand they're very busy
people. They're playing for the price of
eggs. Okay? So, this is they're not
supposed to be able to be up on us.
>> It's a good point. I've never thought
about.
>> Yeah. Why would we be talking to them?
>> Why Why are we talking to them? You see,
so right from the get-go, and and by the
way, all of the um it's the Israelis, uh
we have a thing called the Defense
Intelligence Agency. Um their reports
that were done after the bombing, uh
were leaked and they all say the same
thing, which is we created holes. We
probably shook these underground
chambers. We're not sure because we had
no eyeballs on that, but we have no idea
where that enriched uranium is. And we
have good reason to worry they got them
out because we actually have a satellite
picture that shows two days before we
bomb Ford, there's a bunch of trucks
moving stuff out. Gee, what do you think
you might move out if America's about to
bomb your site again? I I don't think
they're moving out the popcorn. So, um,
and it's pretty this material can be
moved in what look like large scuba
tank. They call them scuba tanks, but I
I I I try to show pictures of this, too.
They're they're they're actually like as
large as this table. So, you need
basically trucks. Trucks like that
satellite photography shows they took
out. So, so we can't say for sure, but
what you see is these are the
indications that you worry they've
dispersed the material even before we
hit the site. So,
>> and then we attack.
>> Yeah.
>> The United States attacks in February.
February 2026, which is
>> No. Feb. Yep. February 2026. February
2028. We start again. This time with
regime change. Notice we don't go even
after the physical m the nuclear
material. We don't know where it is. So
for the average person, the average
person would think if you take out the
supreme leader, then the war is over.
Drop the bomb on the person and the war
is complete.
>> Yeah. So let's talk about your your
Jenga thing here because what what I
find Stephen. So keep in mind I am
advising teaching some of the most
brilliant minds in the in the country.
Now a lot of these smart people though,
they don't know that they they've been
given like one inch deep briefings,
maybe even one sentence briefings. So
their image
is often like this and it's wrong. This
is what they think the regime looks
like. And they think that because
they've been given b they basically have
been consuming probably for years one or
two sentences about the structure. They
know there's a supreme leader. They
might know there's nuclear facilities,
missiles command. And so it looks like,
oh my goodness gracious, that if you
could just simply take out the right
node, you would be able to make this
whole thing fall down. Okay, but that's
the wrong image, Stephen. This is the
way smart people think. The problem is
this is a false image of most regimes,
even the bad ones, and certainly the
Iranian regime. Let me just focus on the
Iranian regime. The Iranian regime is
more like a matrix. It's more it's not
brittle the way this is. So you can keep
trying to pull things out but with a
matrix or uh I think the corporate
structures now are built to be adaptive
to change because you have so many
changes that happen. The structure needs
to adapt to change. That is basically
the structure of revolutionary regimes
going back to before World War I.
>> Okay. I want to ask a dumb question.
>> Y
>> when they took out the supreme leader in
Iran, I who's going to give out the
instructions?
>> The adaptive system adapts and fills in
the holes. It fills in the holes usually
with what's left. And in this case, the
supreme leader that we took out this
particular hole, this was the guy who
had two fought was they're called these
are religious edicts. It's like a people
uh edict
>> against nuclear weapons. It's a
religious he's the leader of essentially
the religion a little bit like the Shia
pope
>> and he um is actually issuing religious
doctrine
>> and as and that's called a fatwa and as
a religious doctrine he issued two that
said Iran should not have nuclear
weapons. The guy we killed was one of
the guard rails against nuclear weapons.
How does that He was He was developing
them in his
>> No, no, he's developing the enrichment
material. They hadn't been fashioned yet
that we know of as nuclear weapons.
Okay. So, we're worried about again this
enrichment going from 5% to 20%, to 60%.
But they hadn't actually taken that next
step, which is more of an engineering
step to develop the nuclear weapon.
Now we took out the person who at the
very tippy top was balancing the hawks
and doves and he had decided for decades
to issue this these fatwas. He did it
not just once but twice. His son who
took over the new supreme leader no
fatwa yet. That fatwa died with this
guy. So will the new leader come in? uh
it's not clear he's got the religious
authority to do anything like what his
father did. This is this is a very
different world and he's known to be way
more aggressive than his father. Uh he's
been in charge of the the bosi the uh
basically the uh the the police that
like to go and kill the protesters. He's
been the guy who's who's been very very
uh strongly uh supporting if not leading
that particular effort. And last night
it was announced that he has been
appointed as the new leader of
>> the new supreme leader.
>> Did did Trump expect this?
>> I think that he u expected it because he
kept trying to talk the Iranians out of
it. This is what he meant by uh last
week when President um Trump was saying
that he wanted um uh not this guy. He
specifically said not the sun. And then
he he had a problem because people kept
pushing him and they said, "Okay, well,
if you don't like the son, who who would
you pick?" And he said, "Well, it is a
problem because when we killed the
Supreme Leader, we killed around the
leader 20 or 30 others who we actually
thought were better. So, we actually
took out the best alternatives when we
killed the when the Supreme Leader was
killed." And every So, everybody's
scratching their heads going, "What are
we talking about here?" So, so we
actually helped the by killing the
competitors to the sun,
>> we made it more likely the sun. And so
what I'm trying to explain, Stephen, is
this adapts. Okay? So that you're not
really taking these uh pieces out.
You're rearranging
them and you are moving up in this case.
You're moving up
>> the next Supreme Leader. Well, it's
there's the Supreme Leader, but what
we're not showing here, you're see
you're seeing the target sets that are
being discussed. You're not seeing the
Revolutionary Guard.
>> What is that?
>> That is part of the army. The Iran has a
million men in arms. A million. That's
is that's as many as we have in our 300
million people. They have 92 million.
They have a million in arms. And about
150 or 200,000 of them are what are
called the revolutionary guards. These
are the most aggressive, the most uh
well-trained. Um these are the most
dedicated to the regime. The news the
son who just we just uh just took over
is the prime candidate for that group.
So when we took out a link here, it's
not just being replaced by another
It's being replaced by a very aggressive
individual who's backed by some of the
most aggressive part of that millionman
army. So this is what I was trying to
explain in my substacks where when you
take out the leader, you may kill the
leader, but you get in its place a
harder regime, a more resilient regime,
a tougher regime that wants to lash back
even more aggressively
>> because you killed dad.
>> You killed dad. And also, if you don't
lash back, how does the new leader get
his credibility with everybody else? If
he's a wimp, why doesn't he get a bullet
in the back of the head? You see the new
just because he's appointed a new
leader, he's still just just like when
you're the head of a new uh company like
let's say you take over a there's a
company that's in shambles and they get
rid of their CEO and they bring you on.
Okay? Well, you got to have a plan. You
see, and if you don't have a plan to
turn that thing around pretty soon, you
know, Elon Musk had to have the big
plan. If you don't have that plan, guess
what? You're out. Same here. So you have
incentive structure here for not just
replacing not just wimpy replacements
certainly not pro-American replacements.
You have incentives for lashing back
against the attacker. Which is why when
we tried to kill Gaddafi in 1986, he
lashes back and uh takes out Panama
Flight 103, killing 271 civilians, 190
Americans. When we try to take out the
Malloic regime to degrade it in uh March
99, Malloic lashes back, sending 30,000
ground forces into cleanse, that is get
rid of a million civilians in Kosovo. uh
this over and over.
>> I mean you have written books about
suicide terrorism.
>> That's right.
>> I've got one of them in front of me here
called dying to win. So I mean you know
a lot about this subject and this is one
of the concerns that actually my fiance
had said to me. She said I explained to
her I was like you know Iran they really
just have drones at the moment so I
think that's fine. And then she posed a
question to me. She was like yeah but
what about suicide terrorism?
>> Let me just explain. So here we are. It
is uh here is of course Iran and imagine
it's back in June. So I'm going to start
the story in June. This is the beginning
of the smart bomb the escalation trap
stage one. We hit uh Foro which is right
around there and then we hit Natans uh
and some other sites right around here.
And what does Iran do here? They lash
back. And who are they lashing back
against? Israel here. They have their
missiles focused on Israel. They're not
really hitting our bases here. They're
hitting Israel and they send 3,000
Israelis to the hospital, the most since
the 73 war. So, a long time. That is
stage one. Okay. Now, what happened when
in February 28? February 28, they're
lashing back a bit against Israel for
sure, but now they're at stage two. This
is why I published this piece today in
foreign affairs about how Iran's winning
the escalation war. So it just came out
just a few hours before we came on. And
what's happening here is called I call
it horizontal escalation because what
they're doing now is they're using
drones mostly a few missiles but mostly
drones. This was almost all missiles no
drones and they're using their drone
capacity which they have a lot of and
it's precision. These drones are like
precisiong guided weapons. They go right
to the target and what they're trying to
do is break this coalition.
>> For anyone that can't see at the moment
that they counted with horizontal
escalation against Saudi Arabia, the
UAE,
>> the coalition that had been formed
against them, they're trying to break
the coalition, you see.
>> Um, and they may well do that.
>> Why Why would they want to break that?
Why my friends are escaping Dubai at the
moment? And I've got a friend staying in
my house in Cape Town because he doesn't
want to be
>> because they want these countries to
kick the Americans out of their country.
>> Okay?
>> Get rid of the uh embassies. Get rid of
the bases. If you can then we don't have
the platforms to plaster them. You see,
these are our basically groundbased
aircraft carriers. I thought they were
they were attacking Saudi Arabia, for
example, because that will make Saudi
Arabia call Trump and say, "Listen,
stop, please. We're losing our tour
tourism. We're shutting our airports."
But well they do want to they are
threatening the tourism hitting the
economic nodes they're hitting uh hotels
uh they're hitting the airports what
they are trying to do is by threatening
tourism which it varies from 5% to 10%
of the GDP of these countries. It's not
trivial amounts here. They're basically
trying to drive wedges between these
countries and America. And America right
now, I don't see any movement through
Congress. I where where is this hundred
billion dollars going to the region to
make up for their lost tourism? I I
don't remember seeing that bill come
through Congress last week. So, um, I'm
just putting a little humorously to
point out these countries are losing a
fair bit right now and that tourism may
not come back for a while.
>> I've got friends that are that have
moved.
>> I've got friends that one of my friends
was thinking about leaving is now in my
house in Cape Town and he's been there
for 5 years. He's leaving and he's going
to move to America. I've got so many
friends that have called you
>> and imagine that we have 500,000
American citizens here and we have the
State Department on CNN. call this
number, we'll help you escape.
>> It's even the media in the UK, you see
it. It's like it's they're showing like
the BBC are showing like evacuations of
UK citizens as they're being greeted in
the airport, putting microphones.
>> So, this is putting a lot of pressure
here and there's something else that's
not widely known, which is there's a big
gap between what the leaders of the
countries want willing to support US and
Israel and their publics. You see, this
coalition that's been built against Iran
here is not clearly going down well with
Publix. These are publiclix. They may
not like Iran. They may be Sunni and
Iran Shia, but they don't want to be
part of an Israeli expansion plan where
Israel is going to conquer more and more
territory and so forth. And so this is
this is this is where the soft
underbelly here of this this isn't just
about the tourism. That's the short
term. The longer term is bottomup
pressure. Uh Sadat, he was a leader of
Egypt in the 1970s. He cut a deal with
uh Israel. It's called the Camp David
Accords. Peace uh uh for land. There was
but it was very favorable. Well, after
Saddat did that, the president of Egypt
in 1981 in a military parade, his own
security guards at the military parade
marched with their guns, came up to his
place, and they shot him dead.
So, you don't this is the real world
here. So, this is very, very dangerous
for these leaders. Now, that's stage
two. Now, what what happens if we decide
to have one of these limited ground uh
uh deployments here? Because after all,
we still don't know where this material
is.
>> What does that mean? So, for anyone that
doesn't know anything about the war,
what does a a ground deployment mean?
Cuz I I saw Trump being asked about this
on the plane yesterday, and he didn't
seem to deny it was going to happen. It
means you try to control a limited
amount of space, say the space around
Fordo or the the nuclear facility that
you bombed in June, and you would send
the say 82nd Airborne in to control the
space.
>> This I don't know what any of this stuff
is.
>> I see. So 82nd Airborne is is a division
that we have that's especially equipped
to uh go into hostile area and land and
control say airports control space.
Think about controlling all the size of
LAX.
>> Mhm.
>> So if you want to control LAX, you bring
in the 82nd Airborne. They will have
5,000 men and women, not just guys now.
And they will come in and they will
control that space LAX, but they will
also be doing this probably not for a
day, not for even a week. They're going
to have to spend weeks and weeks to
search for that material because we
don't know where it is and it's all
deeply buried and a lot of the stuff has
been the the entrances have been blown
up. So this means this means long-term
presence there. You might also take some
of the oil fields to cut off some of the
um money uh here for the uh uh for the
regime. That is where that book comes
in.
>> Do you think it's likely that America
will put boots on the ground, American
soldiers in Iran?
>> I think it's at least 50/50 if not
immediately. So people keep expecting
the escalation to be continuous and then
when there's a pause uh as there was
between June and February, they think,
"Oh, it's over. I'm going to go now
worry about something else." And then
believe me, there's plenty else to worry
about. So we got Minneapolis. We got
plenty to worry about here, even with
violence. But that's not how escalation
operates. Escalation
can happen have a ratchet effect that
has that's spaced out by months of what
seems like peace only to come right back
and you're stuck in that escalation
momentum
>> which is what we've seen
>> which is exactly what we've seen and for
the reason I'm telling you we don't know
where that nuclear material is that has
been the $64,000
weakness in this entire entire idea of
using air power not just in the last 10
days going back to June. It's not just
even about the regime change. It's about
how are you going to get that nuclear
material out. We had a deal this deal
with Obama. Trump did not like it. But
with that deal that held and Iran took
out almost all virtually just only a
tiny bit was left. They not enough for a
bomb. all out of the country and we
watched it. We monitored it. We had 24/7
cameras to monitor this. We had human
on-site inspections to monitor this.
2018, Trump just ripped it up, walked
away unilaterally, and from that point
on, it's been pedal to the metal by Iran
in upgrading that enriched uranium. And
that's how you got to that material that
would be enough for the 16 bombs. And
right now, we don't know where that is.
So
>> yeah,
>> stage one is
>> okay stage one you are beginning the
escalation trap. In this case it's a
smart bomb trap but it because it's with
smart bombs where you have tactical
success near perfect call it 100%
because it it really is but that doesn't
mean you have strategic success tactical
success plus strategic failure.
Then that strategic failure weighs on
you over time because the enemy still
got the thing that you wanted to get in
the first place. Now you do stage two,
which is regime change because after
all, you've already hit the targets. You
can make the rubble bounce, but what
more? That's why we didn't bomb them in
the last 10 days. We might go back and
bomb for some more. Okay, but we already
bombed that. So, so there's only
watching the bubble, but now we're in
stage two because what are your options?
The only other option is well let me get
rid of the regime because then the
regime I will control and the next
regime will just give us the material.
That's not working now. And you hear
today Trump is dancing trying to figure
out what to say. He doesn't want to say
the war's over. Okay. Doesn't want to
say the war is going on. But the bottom
line is we don't even he won't even be
clear about why we're fighting the war
anymore. And I'm telling you there's a
real problem. The nuclear material is
still there.
and it can still be fashioned into those
16 bombs over time. So this is where
then you get this horizontal escalation
where now they've really really working
on this because now it's a long war.
>> They start attacking their neighbors
>> and tried to make it a uh the
consequences go on for months. So just
imagine when are your friends exactly
going to move back? So let's say the war
is over tomorrow. Are they moving back
tomorrow? And when was uh last time uh
have you started to plan for your next
vacation in Dubai? I've been I was I was
planning speaking there in a month's
time, but it's been cancelled already.
>> Well, just Yeah, just starting to think
about that and you know, minor thing
like a drone attack could suddenly come
out of nowhere. You know, you're not
even you think it's I'm just trying to
point out that this is this is the world
now that a lot of people this was a
luxury market. This was the playground
of the rich and famous here. This is
really now changing and it may come back
a year or two from now, but it took two
years for air travel to come back after
911. Just think about that. this. Now,
we haven't gotten to stage three yet,
which gets to your girlfriend's point.
>> How do we move from stage two to stage
three?
>> Oh, well, because you still don't know
where the the nuclear material is,
>> and we don't have to move to stage
beyond uh to stage three this week. We
could do it a month from now, 6 months
from now. The problem is we've now put
in place a much more aggressive
leadership, much more aggressive regime.
We've taken away some of the uh what may
have been guardrails. who can't say for
sure for the nuclear weapon. This this
new regime much more likely and we've
given them every incentive to develop
the nuclear bomb. We're killing them.
So, so what exactly is their incentive?
They're they're their best way to
survive is to have a nuclear weapon. And
you'll say, "Well, we're going to kill
them." Well, we're already killing them.
So, we've taken away their incentive not
to have a nuclear weapon. So, we will
start to worry as each week goes by. Not
because we have great intel, not because
our human well, it's because of the
opposite. We don't have the exquisite
intelligence we had with the Obama deal
to know we had frozen the program. Now,
that we have Swiss cheese at best. And
what we will see in the holes of the
Swiss cheese are indications of nuclear
development. And that will make us worry
because what happens with the nuclear
weapon is it going to go to Hezbollah
and is Hezbollah going to help put it in
uh uh uh Hifa? What's going to happen
with these? Are we going to give is are
they going to give it to the Houthies?
So these are the kind of worries we will
have that will push us to the ground
options and that that is with stage
three
the retaliation approaches the homeland
>> is that realistic
>> if ISIS with its 30 to 40,000 uh
remember ISIS was not a state Iran is an
actual state with 92 million people so
if ISIS can fment commander directed
inspired suicide attacks and other
attacks in San Bernardino, just to kind
of bring it a little bit closer to home
here across the United States. Paris,
remember the big Paris attack. So why
exactly is Iran not if I mean ISIS was a
lot weaker than Iran?
>> Do you think in Iran at the moment
they're working on that? They're working
on a terrorist attack. Well, I don't I
think that my work tells me that it's
most likely to come with the presence of
the ground forces by us. Doesn't mean
it's it's a necessary condition, but
it's just most likely. Russia in 96 with
our help, we played a trick on them.
Assassinated the Chchin leader. It's a
leader of its republic in uh in Russia
called Cheschna Dunv. Only a million
people. And Russia um killed the guy.
And we actually have pictures of him
seeing the the missile hitting him
because we can put the cameras right in
the nose cone.
Then the new guy took over. His name was
Bazv. And he uh launched within three
months, not the next week, Operation
Jihad. And his operation jihad was much
more vicious tactics. Kick the Russian
forces. Russia is a big country. You
know, hundred almost 200 million people
compared to this little province of a
million. Kicked the Russians out after
three months. Launches a waves of
suicide attacks, massive kidnappings
here. This really went on for years and
years. So when you say, are they
planning it? I I don't think it's quite
right, Stephen. It's not like they have
the detailed plan they're about to
execute. they have the next wave of
possibilities
which would come I think most likely
with stage two so stage three so as this
is expanding as the war expands it will
go global
>> really
>> you are already seeing it global with
the supply chain and you're seeing it
with the oil so that's already happening
so um what Iran said today the the uh
response to Trump's press conference
today that just literally happened
before we came on is okay we will allow
Gulf States your oil tankers to come
through if you kick the Americans out.
So kick the Americans out and we'll let
you pass.
>> If you don't,
>> if you don't, we got drones. So they
didn't put that in there, but everybody
knows they got drones.
>> And again, for if you were explaining
this to a 16-year-old.
>> Yeah.
>> Just to keep it super simple, there's
this passageway across the water where a
lot of the oil tankers go.
>> Yep. It's straight of Hormuz.
>> Hormuz. And it sounded like the tankers
are refusing to go through there at the
moment.
>> Sure. Because one has been hit, but it
only takes one to be hit with a drone.
Only one. Because the people driving
those tankers here, they're doing it for
a paycheck, not a bullet. They're not
really wanting to die for this. This
isn't a nationalist cause to ship the
the oil.
>> Explain why it matters to the world. If
if oil doesn't go through this straight
of Hummus, what matter? What happens?
>> Yeah. Well, we can talk about it in like
technical terms, but the big thing to
say is this is what's going to increase
the price of gas at the pump and it's
already gone up. When you cut the flow
of the oil, it has global effects. It
doesn't just affect this little region
here. It doesn't just affect China over
here. It affects everybody. And that's
why the Europeans are starting to freak
out because this they're already every
government worries about we talk about
affordability. That's about to change.
>> And is this your point about how it
changes the politics at home because
people someone goes to the pump today,
they go why is the oil higher?
>> That's right. Why is the we just came we
we now have 4.4% unemployment. Um if we
and and President Trump was trying to
say it's all getting better, the
interest rates are going down. Well,
that all predicated on us not having
inflation. You see, when the oil is cut,
the inflation goes up, the affordability
becomes a problem. That is what is
panicking a lot of the businesses right
now because they're going to lose
business and and it's a problem of risk.
It's not just about the damage. So, a
little a few of these drones can have an
inordinate effect on risk. Now let's
bring in another piece which is Russia
we find out is providing targeting
intelligence to Iran much the way we
provide targeting intelligence to
Ukraine to hit uh uh targets in Russia.
And what does that mean? That means
those drones which are precisiong guided
now can more easily find exactly which
ship to hit. So
>> we know that Russia are doing that.
because we've got it pretty well
confirmed from Yeah. It's you would hear
much more push back here. And what
you're hearing from Secretary Hegsth is
not it's not happening. You're saying,
"Oh, no. Well, let's not overw worry."
No, it's happening. And they're worried
because that's the that's the again the
dancing around. They're not denying the
fact that it's actually happening.
>> I think Trump actually when asked said
something words to the effect of, "I
wouldn't blame them because that's what
we do to them."
>> Exactly. Exactly. And why is he talking
to Putin today? He's not talking He was
just on the phone with Putin before he
did his press conference. What's he
talking to Putin about? Bad intel, I'm
sure, and maybe cutting a deal, which is
we'll deny the Ukrainians the intel if
you deny. You see, this is the this is
this is the the cascading effects of the
politics dominates the tactics.
>> And that's exactly what Trump said. He
said on March the 7th when asked about
Russia teaming up with Iran on
intelligence, he said, "If we asked
them, they'd say, "We do it against
them." Wouldn't they say that we do it
against them?
It's almost justifying it.
>> Trump often just speaks his mind. Uh
sometimes he kind of hides things, but
some often he speaks his mind. And what
you're seeing here is of this is the
natural thing. Russia is uh what's good
for the goose, good for the gander.
They're doing the same thing to us that
we've done to them. And they have and
they're doing it to hurt us, you see. So
rather than just spasmotically or spasm
response here, which we often think the
the foes we're up against are stupid. We
essentially think they're dumb. We call
that irrational. But what's really
happening, Stephen, is um since the
Vietnam War, we have been up against
foes that have understood something
about America, which is the way to get
at us is polit politically. Make it a
long war. Play the politics. You can't
go toe-to-toe with us on the
battlefield. We'll just clean their
clock over and over. They don't often
try. They don't go toe-to-toe with us.
We lost the Vietnam War with never
losing a battle. How did we lose? We
lost the long game. 58,000 dead, no end
in sight, a forever war. What are we
doing this for? That is how the North
Vietnamese won. And that's how the
Afghan Taliban won. That's how the bad
guys typically beat us. They don't
always win, but the bottom line is we
have a soft underbelly. It's not the
military.
Much of the reason most people haven't
posted content or built their personal
brand is because it's hard and it's
timeconuming and we're all very very
busy and if you've never posted
something before there's so many factors
in your psychology that stop you wanting
to post what people will think of you am
I doing this right is the thing I'm
saying absolutely stupid all of these
result in paralysis which means you
don't post and your feed goes bare I'm
an investor in a company called Stanto
which you've probably heard me talk
about and what they've been building is
this new tool called Stanley that uses
AI, looks at your feed, looks at your
tone of voice, looks at your history,
looks at your best performing posts, and
tells you what you should post, makes
those posts for you. You can also just
use it for inspiration. And sometimes
what we need when we're thinking about
doing a post for our social media
channels is inspiration. Building an
audience has fundamentally changed my
life, and I think it could change yours,
too. So, I'm inviting you to give this
new tool a shot and let me know what you
think. All you have to do is search
coach.stand.store. store now to get
started. One of the smartest things a
business can do is build like a bigger
company without actually hiring like
one. But the problem we all face is that
most companies don't have every skill in
house. So when I look at the businesses
seeing real success today, the
consistent pattern with all of them is
how quickly they move. They bring in
specialists with skills and emerging
areas to keep themselves ahead. Even in
our company, we've spent the last year
pulling in talent across areas like AI
native strategy, no code builds, and
product workflows. And we find this
talent through our longtime partner,
Fiverr Pro. Their premium service only
shows you vetted talent. So, you've
always got the safeguard that anyone you
pull in to help you with a complex
project, has the skills that you're
after, and will deliver to the same high
standards as your internal team. And
most importantly, they'll keep up with
the pace. It's a simple strategy, but it
lets us stay agile without compromising
on quality. So, if you need these kind
of skills in your business, head to
pro.fr.com to find pioneering talent to
fill your business's gaps. That's
pro.fr.com.
>> What do you think happens next? If you
had to, no offense sitting. Yeah.
>> If you had to predict what you think
happens next, what would you predict?
>> Well, I say this at the end of the
foreign affairs article that just
literally came out a couple hours ago,
which is President Trump is on the horns
of a dilemma and he has no golden
offramp. He's looking for offramps, but
there's no golden one where he comes out
politically ahead. So, he's got a
choice, sometimes called a Hobbesian
choice, a Hobsonian choice where you cut
your losses, accept political loss now.
And right now, if he pulls back, and
what does it mean to pull back? You got
to pull your forces back. It's not
enough to say you're just doing a pause.
If you want to stop, if you want to stop
for real, you take those aircraft
carriers and you send them out
somewhere. You send them to Asia. You
send them here. You got to actually make
you got to do something here. So, choice
one is you stop your bombing campaign.
You cut your losses. You do your best to
say we just wanted to destroy missiles
even though nobody will believe it.
Okay. Um but that means you accept a a
modest loss now. Or the other is you
double down and you go on for more
weeks. go on for more weeks hoping
you'll kill this leader and maybe the
next one won't be so bad or you'll
you'll have some other sort of uh
outcome that you can't imagine. And
Trump is nothing I call him a chaos kid.
He thrives in chaos and he often comes
out of this with something happening
like when you know sort of down the road
you didn't expect it. He probably didn't
expect it. But in this case, the price
is more likely going to be a political
failure of the first order because we
have the midterms coming. So if if he
he's got a choice, stop now, cut your
losses, accept a limited political
defeat, or double down, go on for a few
months, go through more stages of this
uh smart bomb trap I'm explaining, and
you're really now in Lynden Johnson
territory. Remember I mentioned before
where in Vietnam he kept escalating,
kept moving up the escalation ladder.
Every rung he said, "Well, no, we have
escalation dominance. We're just going
to double down. We're going to hit them
harder the next time. We're going to do
this the next time." Sound familiar? And
then what happened is it became
absolutely clear uh that this was going
nowhere and the 68 election came was
coming and Lynden Johnson's own
Democrats said, "Mr. president, we can't
ride your horse into that. We got to do
something. And the problem is they
didn't pull the plug fast enough here.
That's how they lost. They don't they
they don't pull the plug fast enough.
So, you end up having a bigger loss
later.
>> When you talk about the the um
underbelly that the United States has
where they can't prolong these wars, am
I right in thinking this is basically a
function or a a consequence of living in
a democracy where every four years
>> I I think it's a function of a war of
choice. So when we were attacked in
Pearl Harbor, we were attacked.
>> We were reluctant to get in World War II
and we were we didn't get in until we
were actually struck at Pearl Harbor.
That was enough to really make us angry.
We were pissed off as a country. Okay?
And we were going to get payback not
just for a month, but we were getting
some real payback here. And that's how
vicious that island hopping campaign was
and why it was so vicious here. And that
went on and on. And when we ended the
war um in in dropping those atomic
bombs, 22% of the American public wanted
us to forget the Japanese surrender and
drop more atomic bombs. 22%. We are that
angry. So when we are attacked first, we
have the politics and our advantage.
When we do a war of choice, we can make
up all the reasons why it was a good
idea to start throw the first punch.
They were going to hit us. We were gonna
But when we throw that first punch
first, that's a war of choice. And this
puts the politics in the other camp's
advantage. And that's the problem that
we're facing here. Iran didn't hit us
first. They didn't hit us first in June.
They didn't hit us first before that.
>> So on this point of war of choice,
>> y
there's really two questions I have
front of mind. One is was Trump right
that if he didn't attack then they would
have enriched uranium they would have
made a nuclear weapon and that would
have put not just the region but the
world at danger in your view and then
the second one is this sort of ongoing
debate around the role of Israel in this
war and I think it was Marco Rubio that
came out and I think maybe accidentally
said that the reason why they attacked
Iran was because they heard that Israel
were about to attack Iran.
>> So, so let's go back to the Friday, the
day before we start the bombing
campaign. This is February 27, literally
3:15 Washington time. That's when Trump
makes the go decision. But what's in his
what what is he choosing between? He has
an offer on the table from Iran for a
better deal than the Obama deal for
America. And it is uh it's not
absolutely perfect. They still want to
have some minor enrichment to but that
uh verification lots of things here. Now
maybe it's still not perfect but
President Trump has a choice on that
Friday afternoon. He can go back and he
can work this deal. He can, you know,
after all dealmaker, right? Let's let's
assume he's good at dealmaking. So he
can go back and work the deal. But
that's not what he does. What he does is
he throws that deal away. And also the
supreme leader when he killed that's the
supreme leader was on board with that
deal too. And what do we do instead? We
we go through regime change. So the
choices here Stephen were before we got
to stage two we were in stage one. Stage
one we had hit fore it it would there
were were negotiations and Iran's coming
up with a better deal than the Obama
deal. And what does he do? he goes to
stage two instead. So I don't think this
is this this story you're hearing they
were gonna do X Y or Z is there was a
deal on the table and
>> why did Rubio say that then? Why did he
say that they attacked? Because Israel
were going to attack.
>> Okay, I want to play this video which is
what I'm referring to.
>> Okay,
>> if we stood and waited for that attack
to come first before we hit them, we
would suffer much higher casualties. And
so the president made the very wise
decision. He we knew that there was
going to be an Israeli action. We knew
that that would precipitate an attack
against American forces. And we knew
that if we didn't preemptively go after
them before they launched those attacks,
we would suffer higher casualties and
perhaps even hire those killed. And then
we would all be here answering questions
about why we knew that and didn't act.
>> So what that shows you is that it's the
tail wagging the dog that Israel is
going to attack. as I'm saying just
happened in June. It's a replay of what
happened in June. Israel may well have
We don't know why Israel decided to
attack and kill the Supreme Leader. It
was actually Israeli bombs who killed
the Supreme Leader. Uh and also those
other replacement leaders as well. But
Israel may well have been thinking that
my goodness, Trump is getting too close
to a deal. That's what happened in June.
Trump was on the edge of a deal with
Iran and then Israel goes and kills the
negotiators. You see? So just think
about that for a moment. They're ne
Trump is negotiating with the Iranians
and then they say, "Well, okay, come
back the next day and what is there the
next day? Israeli bombs killing them."
>> So I mean, that's not a good that's not
a great way to handle a partnership.
>> Well, it's just it's just showing you we
had another choice. We could have told
Israel not to do it. We could have told
Israel if you do this, we're going to
cut off all your military aid for the
next three years. That would be put some
pressure on Israel. now then Trump would
have to pay a price politically. So I'm
not saying that's an easy thing to do.
Don't get me wrong, but we need to
understand that that Trump these are the
these are the pressures for escalation
in the escalation trap. So I'm trying to
explain why this isn't just randomly
happening, Stephen. It's not like, oh my
goodness, I can't follow what's
occurring. So that's why when Trump says
in today's briefing uh talks about
stopping the air campaign, is he going
to stop Israel's campaign? That's the
question that did not come up today.
It's in my I put on my accent. The one
of the big questions that did not come
up is President Trump, are you going to
call Netanyahu and tell him to stop
bombing Iraq?
>> Does Trump control Netanyahu in your
view?
>> Well, again, it's about pressures here.
It's about what are the uh what are the
ways you you you you don't it's not
about a matter of like a personal
loyalty relationship. This is politics
of the first order. That's what I'm
trying to explain. So for President
Trump to stop Netanyahu from doing this,
this will be paying a price. He will
have a there are a big part of his MAGA
constituency is very pro not just Israel
pro-Netanyahu
version of Israel. So, this is the
tension in and the politics that I'm
trying to explain, which is why you
don't really want to start the trap in
the first place.
>> And I asked you a second ago, no fence
sitting, what happens next in this war
based on everything you've studied for
the last 30 years, the 20 years of doing
>> I think it's more likely than not that
maybe not in the next week or two. I've
said uh on my substack it's more likely
than not we will get to a limited um uh
ground deployment here because of the
fizzle because of the I'm keep saying
because of the the enriched material
that is floating around and we know it's
dispersing. We know it's dispersing. We
don't know where it is. And there could
be literally hundreds of rooms not much
bigger than this size, maybe two or
three times this size that we're in.
That could be used to uh fashion an an a
fat man style a bomb. Not to
miniaturaturize it, to put on a warhead.
That would be more sophisticated. But if
what you want to do is you want to have
a Hiroshima bomb that can kill 75,000
people in a second or 10 seconds, that
is what they are in the the the the
that's what we're talking about here.
We're not talking about can they put
miniaturaturize the bomb to put it on
the nose cone of a war of a missile.
This is they don't need to. That's very
sophisticated stuff. We couldn't do that
for 10 years.
>> So I guess there's two there's two
questions that come to mind. The first
is to understand someone's behavior, you
have to like understand their
motivations. And I I think a lot about
like where Trump is in his
career, legacy, how how much that
matters to him. It appears from what
I've seen, the whole thing around him
wanting to win the Nobel Peace Prize,
the the Peace Board, the being the
president that stops all, it appears
that he's thinking about how he's going
to be remembered. And when I'm looking
at some of his interviews recently, he's
saying things like, "I don't want it to
be the case that in 10 years time or in
5 years time, the US have to go back in
again because like I didn't do a good
job." And it made me start to believe
that actually one of his one of the
reasons why we might escalate this war
further from a United States perspective
is because
legacy changes in hindsight. And if we
think about George W. Bush,
>> I think you're putting your finger on
it, Stephen.
>> George W. Bush's legacy now is like
completely tarnished because of this one
war and actually how it ended.
>> Yeah. But also
>> it's a mistake in hindsight.
>> But also now mirror image that to the
Iranians. Why aren't they thinking about
their legacy?
>> Think about that for a moment. Why would
the Supreme Leader 86 years old decide
he's not going to take too many more
precautions? How many more months does
he had cancer apparently? How many more
months does he got? How does he want to
go out? How does he really want to go
out? What's he want to be remembered
for? A coward or does he want to be
remembered as somebody who stood up for
Iran, the revolution, the whole thing he
built his whole life for? You talk about
Trump where so when I get into behind
when the cameras go off and I get a
chance to uh again, let's just say go to
the West Wing. I'm not seeing people
being picky, minor, petty. I see them
worried about their legacy.
the national security adviserss, their
assistance. They're worrying about their
legacy. Do they want to go down in in
the history of American history as X, Y,
or Z? And this is how humans are. It
doesn't stop uh with like how much money
do you have? It's what's going to happen
with your legacy.
>> So with that in mind, if you think Trump
is legacy motivated,
does that increase the
>> in part? I want to be careful in part.
it's always he can't be reelected. So
I'm like that's not motivating him
because you know you play differently if
you think you can win a second term
which I knew would be important to him.
But the if he is legacy motivated now
when you think about which direction
he's going to grow go in it does appear
on the balance of things that he's not
going to want it to be left a mess. And
the biggest mess that could really
embarrass him and his legacy uh in with
international is if Iran has a nuclear
bomb and they detonate a test say next
September.
Let's just imagine what would happen
next September. So people need to think
about see the discussion of Iran and
nuclear bombs here is not very
strategic. It's to scare you. It's oh
they're going to get a bomb and the
first one's going to go on Tel Aviv. The
second one's going to go on New York. I
don't think that's the sequence. Why
would they? Why? If they're willing to
commit suicide to take out Tel Aviv,
they don't need 16 bombs. Okay? If
they're willing to have their entire
population destroyed by they just need
one bomb, take out Tel Aviv, they're
done, right? That's not what's going on.
They're following the North Korea plan.
The North Korea plan that North Korea
figured out when we went through this
with North Korea in the '9s. Okay? the
very same thing except we didn't do the
bombing cuz cuz it was not going to we
didn't get we we avoided the trap. What
they want is multiple bombs at the same
time. So what they want to do if they
can do this is have say five bombs
working at the same time and the first
bomb goes off as a test in the
mountains. In the mountains and then
what do we say? Oh, they blew it.
They're stupid. They blew their one test
and then they do a second test.
Still in their mountains. Okay. When we
dropped the first bomb on Hiroshima,
wasn't clear we had any more. When we
dropped the second one, nobody needed to
wait for a third or fourth. Nobody
really we they knew more would come. You
see what I mean? So with Iran the this
is again we're talking about now um you
know let's let's call it the brown belt
or black belt strategy here that they
are and notice they have been very smart
in their escalation.
What you would do is the North Korea
strategy which is again you want
multiple bombs and then you want to do
some tests and even if one doesn't quite
work you want to have another. You want
to have multiple bombs so that you can
do multiple tests. You see, and that is
how North Korea basically stopped Trump
trying to kill the leader. So notice
that Trump wants to say it was just his
winning personality because, you know,
Trump is so charming here. But North
Korea now has 60 working nuclear weapons
as, you know, best we can tell. And the
idea that uh we're going to start
killing leaders in North Korea anytime
soon, I'm not sure that's going to
happen.
>> They're kind of immune now, right? Well,
and notice that Ukraine had a bunch of
nuclear weapons in the 90s, gave them
up, and there's a lot of people in
Ukraine right now are saying, "Boy, I
wish we had those nuclear weapons back
or else we wouldn't be fighting this
war." So, you start to look at the
history. Why does America have nuclear
weapons here? Are we an evil country and
the reason we have is because we're
evil? We want it for our security. So,
why doesn't Iran want it for their
security? So, this is the strategy part
that we have to the politics. Steve and
I keep trying to talk about.
>> So you're saying your prediction is that
we're going to move to stage three where
Trump
>> Okay, I'll go 7525.
>> 75% which way?
>> That we will put we will send in some
ground forces to get that dispersed
material. Um the only 25% would be if
somehow magically the Iranians gave it
to us.
>> So
>> So that's where the 25% comes from
because there is some chance
>> that there there's some I don't want to
I mean we live in the real world um
here. So I but I think the problem we're
going to face is it's going to become
more and if you're in Iran right now
exactly why aren't you fashioning the
nuclear weapon? We're already killing
you. We can pause for months and say we
won't kill you and then you wake up one
day and you're dead. This we've done
this movie now several times on Iran.
Your best chance of survival is a
nuclear weapon. And so we now know that,
our intel knows that, Israel now knows
it, we've taken these options. Uh so
unless Trump will make a deal, that's
that 25%. So I I think if he makes a
deal, then there's a chance that Iran
will go forward here.
>> If the 75% path plays out,
>> Yep.
>> we put boots on the ground.
>> What happens then?
>> Now we're at stage three. Now we've
moved to stage three because we have to
search very not just so we will start by
deploying ground forces in a very
limited area. Say we're going to go to
Esphon it's called that's that's the the
uh do we have a
>> I mean you could try and write on there
does that work?
>> Um the thing I'm trying to explain yeah
assume this is Iran. Yeah. Okay. We will
start by putting in um a small footprint
and again we have several options here
to do it. Um and so the hunt will be for
the enriched material. But let's say
that we even find it Stephen, how do we
know that in the intervening almost a
year since the bombing, 10 months since
the bombing, how do we know they haven't
enriched more somewhere else? Because
this is what happened with um the WMD
and Iraq and Sodom Hussein in the '9s
through 2003. We had inspectors in. We
could never be sure. There wasn't
material.
And the problem was over time the fear
got worse and worse and worse. And the
fear is a nuclear handoff or the
radiological handoff. You hand off some
of that material to Hezbollah to the
Houthis. They
>> who are Hezbollah and the Houthies?
They're like
>> they are terrorist groups.
>> They we call them terrorist groups. Um
and the uh and Hezbollah uh which is
this famous terrorist group started in
1982. How did Hezbollah start? Where'd
it come from?
>> Is it the CIA again?
>> No, it's Israel. Israel invades southern
Lebanon in June of 82 with 78,000 combat
soldiers. 3,000 tanks and armor
vehicles. So, think about that. That's
like invading Chicago with 78,000. So,
just or LA with 78,000.
Okay? So, they invade uh southern
Lebanon with 78,000. Israel does. One
month later, Hezbollah is born as
resistance movement. So, Hezbollah was
born out of resistance to Israel. They
have hated Israel from the beginning
because that's how they were born. You
see? So what you have is you have a
group that's hot been radical since and
since 82 this has been going on since
82.
Israel just can't put that country that
Hezbollah group out of business. And
what are they doing literally this week?
They're trying to depopulate this
Beirut, the city of Beirut. Because what
happens when you go up against terrorist
groups, which we haven't described, but
the terrorist group here is like a group
that's in a sea of people. Okay? and you
keep saying all I want to do is get rid
of that terrorist group. The problem is
that in all that effort, military effort
to get rid of the terrorist group, you
do kill them, but they regenerate and
they regenerate and they regenerate just
as Hezbollah has for God 45 years
almost. Okay. And so what do you then
push to do? Get rid of all the people.
>> So you think I'll just genocide?
>> I don't want to use those terms because
I've written about that. That's a that
that has certain very spec. So that's a
whole conversation here. But I just want
to point out how is it that Israel got
itself into the idea they were going to
cleanse expel
um large portions of the 2 million out
of Gaza. That happened because they got
into stage three of the escalation trap
in Gaza. So this isn't just about
America. So we're only talking about the
escalation frameworks with respect to
this one conflict. really it applies
much more broadly. I've developed these
since I taught for the Air Force because
I needed to find a way to help our
government, our military understand
how the transition from the bombing or
the military piece
to the outcome. And what's in the middle
is the military, the bombs change
politics. They change politics in the
enemy. They change politics for us. For
us, we don't want to lose. And that's
why we got stuck in a for in two forever
wars. Um, and now we may well just get
right back into another one. Not because
Trump wants to. He's being sucked into
it.
>> So, what happens after stage three?
>> After stage three, this is what America
has faced in Vietnam. And President
Biden faced this in spades here. When
you try to pull out after you're in
stage three and end these ongoing
conflicts here, usually it ends poorly
for your legacy. And you saw that with
Lyndon Johnson. And you saw that with um
President Biden. President Bid actually
President Trump is the one who was
negotiating with the Taliban to pull
out.
>> But President Trump wouldn't leave. Not
leave. He didn't leave before. Who who
did he hand it off to? He handed it off
to Biden. Biden pulled out. And what has
Biden's legacy been? It's been negative
ever since. If you look at his opinion
polls, pres President Biden, you will
see he was riding high until he withdrew
from Afghanistan and he never recovered.
Yes, inflation hurt too. The bigger hit
was the Afghanistan problem. And this is
where this is why President Trump is
really stuck. You see, he's on that
horns of the dilemma. Does he want to
accept the short-term price, which is
real, or does he want to go and double
down? And then you face the potential
long-term price of becoming LBJ
and President Biden.
>> This company that I've just invested in
is grown like crazy. I want to be the
one to tell you about it because I think
it's going to create such a huge
productivity advantage for you. Whisper
Flow is an app that you can get on your
computer and on your phone, on all your
devices, and it allows you to speak to
your technology. So, instead of me
writing out an email, I click one button
on my phone and I can just speak the
email into existence and it uses AI to
clean up what I was saying and then when
I'm done, I just hit this one button
here and the whole email is written for
me and it's saving me so much time in a
day because Whisper learns how I write.
So, on WhatsApp, it knows how I am a
little bit more casual. On email, a
little bit more professional. And also,
there's this really interesting thing
they've just done. I can create little
phrases to automatically do the work for
me. I can just say Jack's LinkedIn and
it copies Jack's LinkedIn profile for me
because it knows who Jack is in my life.
This is saving me a huge amount of time.
This company is growing like absolute
crazy. And this is why I invested in the
business and why they're now a sponsor
of this show. And Whisper Flow is
frankly becoming the worstkept secret in
business, productivity, and
entrepreneurship. Check it out now at
Whisper Flow spelled w
lw.ai/
Steven. It will be a game changer for
you.
We have finally caved in. So many of you
have asked us if we could bundle the
conversation cards with the 1% diary.
For those of you that don't know, every
single time a guest sits here with me in
the chair, they leave a question in the
diary of a CEO and then I ask that
question to the next guest. We don't
release those questions in any
environment other than on these
incredible conversation cards. These
have become a fantastic tool for people
in relationships, people in teams, in
big corporations, and also family
members to connect with each other. With
that, we also have the 1% diary, which
is this incredible tool to change habits
in your life. So many of you have asked
if it was possible to buy both at the
same time, especially people in big
companies. So, what we've done is we've
bundled them together and you can buy
both at the same time. And if you want
to drive connection and instill habit
change in your company, head to the
diary.com to inquire and our team will
be in touch.
>> I have to ask then, you know, you said
when you're in the White House, they're
very smart people.
>> Yeah, pretty smart. Presumably Trump
knew this stuff or someone around him
knew that by the way when you drop bombs
these sort of very specific bombs we
have now that can hit a hit a very
narrow target and take out a leader um
you get into an escalation trap. Surely
he knew this.
>> I believe I believe General Kaine told
him almost this this in so many words. I
believe and I don't have the exact
evidence for it but we have some
inklings of it.
>> What do you think he thought was going
to happen? I think he I I've described
Trump um as the ultimate chaos kid.
There are people who thrive in chaos.
They feel the best when they're in a
chaotic situation. And I think that he
um believes he can navigate the chaos
better than anybody else. So what I want
to the the answer to the question I was
looking for is what did he think was
going to happen? Did he think I'll drop
these bombs, Hermione will be out,
someone else will come in, then we'll
negotiate with that guy and then we'll
get a better deal? I think that's not
quite I think that's too specific.
People keep looking for that. In my
experience here, it also um is that's
too narrow of a way to understand what I
think happened here. And again, we're
reading quite a bit into very few tea
leaves here because this will come out
over time. But um I believe that what
you're seeing with President Trump is he
likes to do what's called mixing it up.
He wants to get the chaos going and then
he um he reads the chaos very well and
and when it's um a media storm, man,
there's very few people that have beaten
him. Just think about that. That's why
he's president twice. He's he's beaten
quite a few black belts at this, right?
But this is a different story. So if you
take that same MO and you apply it to
political violence, now you have these
other actors. You have this other set of
momentum. you have Israel uh playing
this big role. You have the Iranians
playing a big role. You're suddenly uh
now have more players that can trap you
in the chaos. And this is I think what
has happened. Um now with Venezuela, he
also went through the first stage of the
trap. And notice that with Venezuela, he
just said, "Oh yeah, we're just going to
forget about developing the oil." No
second stage. Okay. So in in with
Venezuela, there's a reason why that has
paused. It's because he didn't go to
stage two because the oil company said,
"We're not going to die for you to build
that oil." So he is basically um he took
out one person, just literally one
person. That person's not even dead yet.
And he's not really developing any of
those oil fields in Venezuela. They're
just not being developed.
>> He said he has a good relationship with
the Venezuelan government. Now the
>> as long as because he's not doing any
the the Venezuelan government, he's
leaving them in place. He's basically
declaring victory and moving on.
>> He removed Maduro, kept the others in
and it sounds
>> and kept the regime.
>> It sounds like that might have somewhat
inspired his move to Bomaran because it
appears on the surface that Venezuela
kind of didn't go too badly. It kind of
was a uh political victory.
>> Chaos Kida chaos
>> snatched him out of bed with his snatch.
But then he stopped. So this would be
the equivalent would be last June. So
last June, okay, he went through stage
one and he tried to stop. What made the
difference here? It wasn't Trump. It was
the intel he got from Netanyahu. The
phone call from Netanyahu, which is uh
President Trump getting ready. We're
about to assassinate the supreme leader
and about 20 of his associate the other
leaders here. you decide how you want to
handle this, but we're we're taking off.
And so that is that did not happen with
with uh with um uh the Maduro regime. So
just imagine that there was another
country that had after Trump took out
Maduro decided they were going to keep
assassinating u the regime in uh
Venezuela. Now you would be in a
different story.
>> You made a quite famous prediction,
professor. You predicted in 2009 that
America's era as the world's only
superpower was ending.
>> Oh yes, and I think that is true. We
haven't talked about China, but I
believe that since Trump has come into
office, he's making China number one.
His tariffs have done nothing but um uh
help China. Uh China's been on charm
offensive since the tariffs have have
been and and they're picking up all the
pieces. I was just spent two weeks in
China in June while we were bombing um
Iran. I said I had to learn how to do
social media. I toured Advanced
Industries in China for two solid weeks.
One of the most amazing visits uh trips
I've ever had in my whole career and it
was stunning. So Stephen, since co
almost nobody has gone to uh China. Now
if they have they've gone to Beijing or
Shanghai. They haven't gone to Wuhan.
They haven't gone to Shenshen. Visited
the BYD uh electric car factories. Um
seeing the robots that are now doing the
metallergy and you can't see it very
well on the web because China's keeping
it to themselves. They don't want to
brag about it. They're going they're
motoring ahead. So Wuhan, to give you an
example, Wuhan is kind of like
Pittsburgh. It's a bigger version of
Pittsburgh. It's an old steel area.
That's not Wuhan today. Wuhan today is
the AI. It's it's developing not just a
robotic company. They're uplifting 9
million people in Wuhan. Their uh
medicine is improved. Their
infrastructure is improved. They have
more construction jobs than ever before
because they have to build so much to
uplift the whole 9 million people. This
is what Pittsburgh should have been and
hasn't been. And I know I'm from Western
Pennsylvania. It's heartbreaking to me
to watch what's happened to Pittsburgh
over the last 30 or 40 years. Wuhan,
exactly the same trajectory. An old
steel uh um city is now one of the lead
areas here in they have a robotic
Silicon Valley there that I visited um
and so forth.
>> And why does this matter? Why does it
matter if the US are no longer the
world's superpower? What what then does
history tell us is the consequence of
that?
>> The consequence is first of all you get
enormous tension here uh for violence.
So when you see big hegemonic shifts
>> hegemonic
>> uh that means when one leader the the
world's number one becomes uh replaced
by another bad things happen. This is
what happened how you got the wars
between Britain and France when they
were fighting theirs wars. This is how
you got world war essentially world war
I because of the the rise and fall of
Germany versus uh uh Russia versus
Britain. So these rising and fall they
make a huge difference. Doesn't always
happen. The one time it was peaceful was
when America replaced Britain as number
one. So just think about that. But other
times have been very tense.
>> So how does China feel that the US are
now at war with the Middle East? So,
what's interesting is to get ready for
coming on here. I listened to the All-In
podcast, and I hope that's okay to talk
about somebody else's podcast. I love
that.
>> I think they're brilliant, by the way. I
love it. But what they said just in the
most recent is that that Trump's playing
a game for China. What they said is
China shaking in its boots and that what
this is about is uh it's it's kind of
Venezuela plus Iran is all about to
cause shei to be shaking in his boots in
in April so that um he will somehow make
some bigger deal with Trump. I think
this is just wrong. I think that it may
be that there's some uh uh you know,
China does absolutely buy 90% of Iran's
oil. There's no we're not disagreeing
with the facts of the matter. It's the
interpretation and the consequences for
who's going to be number one down the
road. So my assessment here is China uh
is probably thrilled that we're on the
verge of getting into another quagmire
in the Middle East and that they would
gladly give up. They have about 20% of
their GDP that turn energy not GDP 20%
of their energy it's a much smaller
fraction of their GDP that turns on the
oil issue. uh most of their energy is
not generated through through oil. And
so I think they would really if they had
to give all of the Middle Eastern oil up
to suck us in to a another forever war
with Iran that would go on for years and
years. Oh my goodness gracious. Because
they see themselves as growing through
Asia and spreading their wings through
Asia. And so to get us pinned down in
the Middle East with an even bigger
problem than we had with Iraq, this is
mana from heaven for China. And that's
what I they told that's what I saw when
I was there.
>> If I was Putin or if I was running
China, based on everything you've said
and based on everything I know, I would
really want this war to go on for a long
time.
>> Oh, for sure.
>> I'd really so I'd really be helping
Iran, you know, prolong this thing. And
also because Russia are in their own
situation at the moment with Ukraine.
So, it's quite a distraction from
whatever Putin's objectives are in
Ukraine. No one's really talking about
Ukraine this week.
>> And it's bad for the Ukrainians because
what's happening is by by by the little
bit that Putin has gotten himself
involved here, there is a chance he set
the stage for a deal, which is again
America stops the intel to the
Ukrainians, if Russia will stop the
intel to Iran. That is much much much to
Putin's advantage with Ukraine. So, I
think that you have a situation here,
Stephen, where Putin, it's not so much
he's he's itching to get in the fight,
is he's trying to do it in ways that he
gets something out of it in his in his
relations war with Ukraine.
>> Think about that with President Xi. I
don't think the Chinese want to get in
the fight. I think, in fact, right now,
if I'm if I'm assessing this correctly,
they're probably not wanting to get in
the way of an enemy who's shooting
himself in both feet. So right now,
America's damaging itself a lot more
than China could. And if China inserts
itself, there's a very good chance then
that would help Trump again pull a
rabbit out of a hat. I don't think they
want to do that. I think right now you
just look at this from we're running out
of what's called standoff PGMs.
Remember, Secretary Heg said, "Well,
yeah, okay, we're running out of
standoff PGMs, but we got to do
something from the from the the the
bombs that we can drop more over
country." Well, that's the problem for a
problem for Taiwan. If we're going to
defend Taiwan, we've got to do this with
long standoff precision weapons. And we
all everybody who studies this knows
that. So, if we're really running low on
standoff precision weapons, she's just
licking his chops thinking, "My
goodness, how much better does this
get?"
>> If Trump was listening,
probably not the case. I think he just
watches CNN and Fox News.
>> Um, but if Trump was listening, what
would you say to him?
>> What I would tell him is take the deal.
I would say stop right now and do
everything possible to go back to the
deal you rejected the day before you
started bombing. And what your goal
should be is to get as much of the 60%
enriched uranium out of the country as
possible. If uh you could also get the
20% enriched uranium out, that would be
good, too. But you're probably not going
to get as good a deal. Uh because the
supreme leader you were dealing with is
gone and you now have a much tougher. So
you might have to accept President Trump
a worse deal.
>> Are we just kicking the can down the
road here? Because if you're an Iranian,
like you've said, you've watched bombs
drop. You've you've realized that the
reason why you are such a target is
because you don't have these nuclear
weapons. So is there not an element
where Iran getting nuclear weapons is um
inevitable in some way? So Stephen, this
is the myth of 100% security. So we see
this in not just America but in lots of
uh conflicts in history where the idea
that you don't have 100% security leads
you to essentially do things that look
like suicide for fear of death. So so we
know that that there is a long-term
problem out there. And sometimes a
really good solution is to freeze it for
20 years. just freeze it for 20 years.
And you know what? It's you're right.
You didn't permanently take it off the
table. But if you can freeze a problem
for 20 years, that's actually a lot of
you might get lucky. You might get
something good like the Soviet Union
might just fall apart on you, you know,
out of the blue. It might just fall
apart on you. And not because you did
anything. It's just because something
else changed in the world. So the way to
think about this, Stephen, is not this
idea that we're going to take an action
and have 100% security. This is how big
powers lose wars.
Big powers are up against these little
countries. And think about how often
they lose. We lose to Vietnam. That's
how I got into this business in the
first place. I wanted to understand
that. And so this idea of the search for
perfect security is often getting us
into trouble.
kick a can down. You You're right. It's
only 20 years. I'll take that. That's
better than where we are right now.
Professor Robert Pap of all the things
that we've talked about um
>> which has been a wonderful conversation
by the way
>> and very diverse but really focused on
this subject of what's going on in the
world at the moment with Iran and Trump
and America as decline. What is the
thing that we should have talked about
that we didn't talk about? The big
thing, well, we're finally getting to it
at the end, is the real consequence of
what President Trump has done since
coming into office. uh the real
consequence of the tariffs, the real
consequence of not just uh threatening
um uh discussion of Greenland, but but
becoming very aggressive with our
European allies on Greenland, being very
aggressive to the point of um um a
taking out a leader from Venezuela,
which is uh in our Western Hemisphere.
So, it's creating what this is really
doing is it's threatening America's
primacy. So I am a big believer that
America should be the strongest most
secure state on the planet. I think that
is good for us.
That means that it does make it is
valuable to be the top dog to be the
number one strongest economic military
power. But in order to do that you have
to be the world's number one economy for
real. And with $40 trillion in debt, um
with uh us pushing away our trading
partners, with us uh engaging in hostile
actions here which are scaring the rest
of the world to further drift away from
us and maybe not side with China, but be
neutral. Oh my goodness gracious. And
and again, as I said before, China is
motoring ahead on the AI revolution.
We're talking AI, but are we really
doing Wuhan? Are we up to Wuhan? I think
it would be interesting for uh for uh
folks to go to Wuhan um and actually
visit uh or go to Senchan uh and visit
um or go to Hang Cho and visit and see
where uh Alibaba is and see uh that it's
it's not just one company here. It's not
just deep seek that there's clusters
that are being built that are uplifting
10 million people at a swath. And my
goodness, why aren't we doing that in
America? We certainly need that in the
restaurant belt.
>> We're too distracted.
>> We're too distracted, which is what I'm
trying to say is to China's advantage.
And I think this is the real long-term
price, which is are we actually eroding
our position as the world's number one?
And I think our primacy is in is in
danger.
>> Professor Robert Pap, we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest, not knowing who they're leaving
it for. Ah,
>> the question left for you is what is the
prediction you have for the future that
most people do not want to hear?
>> Well, this is going to lead into the
conversation. So, I have a book coming
out in September called Our own Worst
Enemies. As bad as all this problem is,
Stephen, as bad as it is, I have spent
the last several years focusing on
what's happening with political violence
in the United States and its
normalization.
And the most the biggest danger that we
face, even bigger than Iran and all the
problems we've just talked about, is the
normalization of political violence in
our own country. And by political
violence, you mean
>> I'm I'm talking about in the last 10
years, we have seen a surge of violent
riots. We have seen a surge of political
assassinations
that we haven't seen since the 1960s. On
top of that, we've just had Operation
Midway Blitz in my city, Chicago. That
is the surge of militarized um enforce
immigration enforcement. Oh,
>> which surged ice which surged into
neighborhoods over over almost 300
times.
>> Crazy.
>> Not just a small. And then what happened
after they left um uh Chicago is they
did even more of that in Minneapolis. So
these this trajectory
Stephen that we're on where we are
seeing the incredible normalization of
political violence and it's happening on
both the right and the left. It's not
I'm not trying to make moral equivalence
but it is h and the book will explain
this is probably the greatest danger
that we face because if we are our own
worst enemies. Think of what that means
for us being that great power that that
is so important for us and the great
future we want for our families and our
our our communities here. We are in
danger of becoming our own worst
enemies. Not for a day, not for a month,
but for years.
>> Professor, thank you so much. Um, if
anyone wants to go and read more about
many of the things we've talked about
today, where do they go? Substack. I'll
link below.
>> I would I would go you can read my books
on it. You can get them from Amazon. I
would go to Substack. And then, and
that's the escalation trap. Um, and I
would also just be aware that there will
be uh more discussion of political
violence. So, it's not just political
violence abroad and it's not just
political violence at home. It is both
happening at the same time.
>> Professor, thank you so much.
>> Thank you very much. Really, really
enjoyed it. Thank you.
>> Thank you so much. That was fantastic.
>> YouTube have this new crazy algorithm
where they know exactly what video you
would like to watch next based on AI and
all of your viewing behavior. And the
algorithm says that this video is the
perfect video for you. It's different
for everybody looking right now. Check
this video out and I bet you you might
love it.